we don't have a theory of consciousness
or creativity if we did we could program
these into a computer if you can't
program it you haven't understood it
says David Deutsch consciousness and
creativity are mysterious now this
doesn't mean they're insoluble problems
they must be soluble because they are
just features of the mind anything we
can do must be the result of physical
processes and all physical processes are
computable David prove this
mathematically in the same paper that
laid the foundation for quantum
computation this rules out any
supernatural explanation for what our
minds are doing or what we human beings
are mysterious things are just problems
that's all questions aren't answered yet
some people deny some problems are even
problems the philosopher Daniel Dennett
denies consciousness as a problem he
says it's an illusion the philosopher
sam harris denies free will as a problem
he says that's an illusion in both cases
I think they are mistaken and for the
same reason we humans are special
creatures but there is nothing
Supernatural about us nothing magical
yet there is something unique why is it
that people alone among all animals
solve problems by creating explanatory
theories what is this strange thing that
leads to thoughts and minds solutions
philosophy science technology and
civilization what is it about people
that allows for these qualitatively
different capacities we have over any
other system in a known cosmos now like
a fish or a dog we've got a finite
genome but unlike in a dog or fish
something is in that genome that codes
for something very special indeed a code
for a brain that is able to run a mind
that is universal in a special way this
universal capacity is the capability to
create explanatory knowledge that is
such an important fundamental discovery
in philosophy by David Deutsch that it's
import cannot be overstated it's as
important as it is unnoticed as of 2018
why is this fact not informing and
animating research programs and AGI
institutes and university philosophy
departments
I don't know it's as if the equivalent
of the question what is mass was
answered and most physicists simply
ignored it David answered the question
what is a person if you've noticed a
person is an entity that can create
explanatory knowledge and is universal
in its capacity to do so what Universal
here means is there is no problem in
principle that a person is incapable of
tackling and the reason for this is that
the mind which is the software running
on the hardware that is the brain is a
universal computer and then something it
is a universal computer that is
conscious of its own States can direct
its own future States and importantly
whose output cannot be specified in
advance and that's the key we cannot
specify the output of a general
intelligence artificial or otherwise
unlike for any other program we do right
we people are general intelligences we
create new knowledge subjectively we
experience consciousness but to other
people well we cannot directly access
their conscious states we cannot
experience their inner subjectivity yet
how do we know their conscious well what
we do have access to are other people's
creativity we know other people are
creative because we noticed them solving
their problems they're inventing things
and making decisions out there in the
world so with an objective indication in
the form of their creativity of their
inner conscious States the problems that
interest them we can see the creativity
of people we observe in the world is a
unique thing people have that other
animals do not share so while we while
we feel conscious ourselves what we
observe in others is creativity so i
postulate creativity of the kind where
people create explanations or create
knowledge is just the outward
manifestation of an inner consciousness
what it feels like to be creative is
consciousness freewill is that aspect of
consciousness where I am able to obtain
a good sense of my preferences and
upon them that is to say choose but to
know what my preferences truly are I
need to carefully deliberate I need to
solve that problem create that knowledge
as to what my preferences are outward
eventually someone will notice me make a
decision but inwardly only I know that I
felt many different things before the
decision was made emotions perhaps like
excite and there's no confusion or the
thrill of making a new insight it was
all me the contemplate of this problem
for perhaps hours on end I chose this
interesting solution rather than some
other I was free to do otherwise to not
think about it at all in fact if I
desired if I had that conscious state
and chose to pursue it and pay attention
to it or not inwardly it was a conscious
sensation of free will but outwardly it
was a choice made to create knowledge in
that area these things are all facets I
would argue of exactly the same
phenomenon what it means to be a human
and explain the world so what I do as a
person is exercise a free choice in
acting on the best explanation I have
created and now I choose to end this
video